--- PAGE 1 ---
H5 Dripline
Accurate Flow
Grit Happens
Layers of Difference
Reliable, Durable, and High Performing Dripline
H5 Pressure Compensating Heavywall Dripline is built to precisely deliver irrigation with 
market leading efficiency for a wide variety of applications. H5 features precise emitter spacing 
and grit tolerant design to ensure precision flow rates even in the presence of grit and dirty 
water. H5 emitters are proudly built by Rain Bird and assembled in the USA utilizing advanced 
technology and patented manufacturing processes that flow test each emitter.
Rather than fight grit and 
dirty water with filters that 
clog by design, we developed 
our emitter to let the grit pass 
through.  With our dripper, if grit 
gets in, it gets out.
Accuracy is our obsession.  The 
H5 dripper hits target flow at 
low pressures and holds it with 
precision throughout the range. 
H5 tubing has an all virgin outer 
layer for durability, masterfully 
blended inner layer for easy roll 
out, and a smooth bonding layer 
to ensure a reliable bond.

--- PAGE 2 ---
ACCURATE
FLOW
CONSISTENT
EMITTER2
EMITTER
PRECISE
SPACING
Built to Last
rainbird.com/agriculture
® Registered trademark of Rain Bird Corporation
© 2020 Rain Bird Corporation
H5 Dripline
Demand Precision, Consistency, and Accuracy.  Demand H5.
•	 Multi-layered tubing provides unmatched resistance to 
chemicals, UV, and on farm damage.
•	 Clog free emitter due to the widest flow path and extra large 
outlet bath.
•	 Never fade laser-etched labeling of model, size, flow and 
spacing directly on the tubing so you never have to wonder.
A Practical Measure for Coefficient of Variation
•	 Each emitter is accurate to the target flow rate, delivering the 
flow you expect.
•	 Every emitter flow is consistent compared to all other 
emitters.
•	 Spacing between each emitter is consistent throughout the 
coil.
Experts in Drip Irrigation
•	 Our on-staff material scientists have developed unique 
proprietary resin blends providing a consistent product 
every time.
•	 Our special blend minimizes coil memory to produce tight 
coils that are easy to handle, pack, stack, unroll and use.
•	 We have been in irrigation for over 85 years and will be here 
for you this and every season.