--- PAGE 1 ---
®
®
Know how. Know now.
University of Nebraska–Lincoln Extension, Institute of Agriculture and Natural Resources
G1850 
Irrigation Management for Corn
William L. Kranz, Irrigation Specialist, Northeast Research and Extension Center
Suat Irmak, Agricultural Water Management Specialist, Biological Systems Engineering 
Simon J. van Donk, Water Resources Engineer, West Central Research and Extension Center
C. Dean Yonts, Irrigation Engineer, Panhandle Research and Extension Center
Derrel L. Martin, Professor, Biological Systems Engineering
This NebGuide discusses corn irrigation manage­
ment strategy options and objectives.
There are more than 16 million acres in harvested row 
crop production in Nebraska. About 8 million of these acres 
are irrigated. Corn occupies approximately 70 percent of the 
irrigated acreage, or 5.6 million acres. Consequently, improving 
irrigation management can have significant impact on the quan­
tity and quality of Nebraska’s most precious resource: water.
Soil — Plant — Water Relationships
Understanding the relationships between plants and their 
environment is essential to effective irrigation management. 
Plant characteristics important to irrigation management 
include total seasonal water use, daily crop water use, rate 
of plant development, and rooting depth. Important soil 
characteristics include water holding capacity, water intake 
rate, and the presence of any restrictive soil layers that might 
inhibit root penetration and/or water movement. Quantity 
and quality of the available water supply also must be con­
sidered. The objective of irrigation management is to provide 
supplemental water needed by the plant while maximizing 
the value of water.
Corn Water Use Characteristics
Evapotranspiration (ETc), or crop water use, is the water 
removed from the soil by evaporation from the soil surface 
and transpiration by the plant. For corn, evaporation can ac­
count for 20 percent to 30 percent of growing season ETc. 
Transpiration is the last step in a continuous water pathway 
from the soil, into the plant roots, through the plant stems 
and out through leaf surfaces and into the atmosphere. Ap­
proximately 70 percent to 80 percent of crop water use results 
from plant transpiration. The amount of daily corn water use 
varies with atmospheric conditions: air temperature, humidity, 
solar radiation and wind speed. High air temperatures, low 
humidity, clear skies and high wind speed will result in high 
ETc demand. High humidity, clear skies and low wind speed 
will result in lower ETc demand. 
Atmospheric demand must be adjusted for the stage of 
crop development to estimate crop water use on a daily basis. 
A high atmospheric demand day in early May will result in 
little ETc because the corn plant is small with a limited root 
zone and little leaf area to transpire water. The same atmo­
spheric demand day in mid-July will result in near peak crop 
water use because the corn roots are fully developed and the 
plant leaf area is sufficient to transpire water at rates equal 
to the atmospheric demand. This adjustment is referred to 
as applying a crop coefficient to the atmospheric demand or 
potential evapotranspiration.
Seasonal water use is affected by climatic conditions, 
relative maturity range, soil fertility, water availability and 
the interaction of these factors. Although the total amount of 
water used by corn will vary from season to season and loca­
tion to location, it will generally follow the pattern dictated 
by seasonal trends in weather variables and corn develop­
ment. The smooth curve in Figure 1 (Curve A) illustrates the 
long-term average water use pattern for corn. This average 
water use pattern shows typical daily ETc levels throughout 
the growing season based upon the average daily ETc over a 
10 plus year period. The jagged curve in Figure 1 (Curve B) 
illustrates the fluctuation possible in daily ETc values for an 
individual year. Thus, irrigation managers must be familiar 
with the long-term trend but more importantly be able to 
determine what the daily ETc was over the last few days. 
Knowledge of the long-term trend and actual daily crop water 
use rates are critical to determining when to irrigate and how 
much water to apply.
In Nebraska, total corn water use ranges from 28 inches 
per year in the southwest to 24 inches in the east. Water require­
ment depends both on the previously mentioned atmospheric 
conditions and corn variety. The relative maturity range of a 
particular variety has the most impact on seasonal ETc. For 
example, at the same location and in the same year, a corn 
hybrid with a 113-day maturity will use more water than a 
100-day hybrid. Longer-season corn hybrids use more water, 
but they also have the potential to produce more grain if the 
heat units and water supply are available. If both varieties are 
able to mature fully, the grain produced for each inch of ETc 
is approximately equal. The difference in seasonal water use 
is due to total days of water use, and in some cases a differ­
ence in daily water use. 
Due to variation in weather conditions in a given year 
and from year to year, the long-term average crop water use 
per day (Curve A) could vary by plus or inus 0.03 inches per 
day. Day-to-day variation within a given year (Curve B) can 
be more than 0.20 inches per day. Thus, for reasons described 
above, use of soil water sensors and accessing daily crop 
water­ use estimates based on the weather conditions dur­
ing the current­ growing season are highly recommended. In 
addition­, the duration of each growth stage could vary by plus 
or minus two days when compared to the long-term average 
values provided in Table I.

--- PAGE 2 ---
Table I.	
Average crop water use (ETc) by growth stage for 113-day 
maturity corn grown in South Central Nebraska. 
	
Average 	
	
Water	
Water
	
water	
	
needed to	
needed
	
use rate	
Duration1	
reach stage	
cumulative
Growth stage	
(in/day)	
(days)	
(inches)	
(inches)
Emergence (VE)	
0.08	
0-10	
0.8	
0.8
4-leaf (V4)	
0.10	
11-29	
1.8	
2.6
8-leaf (V8)	
0.18	
30-46	
2.9	
5.5
12-leaf (V12)	
0.26	
47-55	
1.8	
7.3
Early tassel (R1)	
0.32	
56-68	
3.8	
11.1
Silking (R2)	
0.32	
69-81	
3.8	
14.9
Blister Kernel (R3)	
0.32	
82-88	
1.9	
16.8
Beginning Dent (R4.7)	 0.24	
89-104	
3.8	
20.7
Full Dent (R5.5)	
0.20	
105-125	
3.8	
24.5
Maturity (R6)	
0.10	
126-140	
1.4	
25.9
1Long-term average number of days since planting required to progress from 
the previous growth stage to the next. For example, to go from the blister kernel 
stage to the beginning dent stage requires approximately 15 days (day 89 to 
day104). Days to each growth stage were determined using the Hybrid-Maize 
Corn Growth Model for the period 1982-2005 at Clay Center, Neb.
Corn does not extract water uniformly throughout its 
rooting depth. Generally, more water is extracted from shal­
low depths and less from deeper depths. If water is applied 
to the soil surface, the typical extraction pattern follows the 
4-3-2-1 rule: 40 percent of the 
water comes from the top 1/4 
of the root zone, 30 percent 
comes from the second 1/4 
and so on. The 4-3-2-1 rule 
is illustrated in Figure 2. 
Water applied using subsur­
face drip irrigation systems 
will result in more water re­
moval from the depth where 
the drip lines are placed. In 
addition, though corn roots 
can reach depths of 5 to 6 
feet, until late in the season 
conservative irrigation man­
agement assumes­ a 3-foot 
effective root zone. Later, 
when predicting the timing 
and amount of the last irriga­
tion, the effective root zone 
is expanded to 4 feet. 
Matching Crop Demands with Water Application
In general, irrigation water is meant to supplement water 
stored in the soil profile and any effective rainfall recorded 
during the growing season. Thus, a water balance approach 
for estimating the irrigation requirement would be: Effective 
rainfall + Soil water removed - Seasonal ETc = Irrigation 
requirement. On a long-term average, corn grown on a deep 
silt loam soil in southeast Nebraska requires about 6 inches 
of net irrigation, central Nebraska requires about 9 inches, 
and the Panhandle of Nebraska requires about 14 inches of 
net irrigation per year (Department of Natural Resources, 
2006). These values will vary from year to year as a function 
of climatic conditions (rainfall, solar radiation, air tempera­
ture, wind speed and relative humidity) that impact ETc as 
described earlier.
When planning an irrigation system, sufficient system 
capacity should be available to meet the crop water use rates 
in column 2 of Table I. However, simply converting the crop 
water use rate to a system capacity may result in unnecessarily 
oversized system components. NebGuide G1851 Minimum 
Center Pivot Design Capacities in Nebraska provides a method 
for estimating system flow rates needed to meet crop water 
demand while accounting for system down time, soil water 
holding capacity­ and the potential for rainfall during the growing 
season. Using this approach, system capacities can be determined 
to meet the management scheme of the operator and minimize 
the installation and operating cost of the system.
The goal of irrigation management should be to provide 
supplemental water while considering the economic and envi­
ronmental consequences. One reason is that corn yield response 
to irrigation water application follows the law of diminishing 
returns (i.e., as the crop approaches maximum yield, the last inch 
or two of water applied will net less additional grain yield than 
the first inch applied). In addition, because irrigation systems 
are not 100 percent efficient at delivering water, it is impos­
sible to convert all of the applied water to ETc and ultimately 
to grain yield. Thus, managers need to consider the potential 
for increased grain yield and cost of water application when 
deciding whether to apply the last inch of irrigation.
Applying several inches of excess water will lower the 
net return for the irrigated field potentially due to depressed 
grain yield resulting from leaching nutrients below the active 
root zone and inhibiting soil aeration. In addition, the cost of 
pumping the extra water would add to corn production costs. 
Pumping costs can be estimated by multiplying the fuel use 
Figure 1.	 Long-term daily average and individual year corn water use with select growth stages.
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Crop water use (in/day)
04/10	
05/10	
06/09	
07/09	
08/08	
09/07	
10/07
Date
A
B
12 Leaf
Blister kernel
Tassel
Silking
Beginning dent
Maturity
Figure 2.	 Root zone soil water extraction and plant root development 
patterns.
Days After Emergence
	
0	
40	
80	
120
0
25
50
75
100
Percent of Depth
Percent of Water Extraction
	
40%
	
30%
	
20%
	
10%

--- PAGE 3 ---
rate per acre-inch by the cost of fuel per unit. For example, 
the estimated fuel use to pump water from a depth of 100 
feet at a pump outlet pressure of 50 psi is approximately1.97 
gallons of diesel fuel per acre-inch. Thus, the pumping cost 
for each inch of water applied would be approximately 1.97 
times the cost of diesel fuel.
In situations where irrigation water supplies and natural 
precipitation are not adequate to meet crop ETc demands, limited 
or deficit irrigation can be effective in increasing yields above 
dryland levels. However, applying less water than is needed by 
the crop will typically result in yield reductions when compared 
to fully irrigated corn. Under extreme water limited conditions, 
water applications should be targeted to critical growth stages 
such as between pollination and early dough, thereby making 
the most efficient use of the water available. 
Growth Stages
Immediately after planting, crop water use consists al­
most entirely of evaporation from the soil surface. Estimated 
ETc rates will typically be less than 0.10 inch per day unless 
the soil surface is wetted by a water application event. Fol­
lowing a rainfall event soil evaporation rate could be more 
than 0.20 inches per day depending on the soil texture and 
residue cover and the recorded amount of rainfall. Irrigation 
during this period is discouraged because water application 
via sprinkler systems could cause a crust to form on the soil 
surface that will reduce water infiltration and in some cases 
impede plant emergence. Maintaining good residue cover will 
limit crust development by absorbing the water droplet energy 
and also minimize soil evaporation by reflecting some of the 
incoming solar radiation. 
About two weeks after emergence, the corn plant grows to 
a height of about 6 inches (4-leaf stage). The permanent root 
system begins to develop from the nodes and growing point 
during this time. At a plant height of about 10 to 12 inches 
(6-8 leaf stage), the tassel and ear are beginning to form inside 
the stalk. The number of kernel rows and kernels in a row are 
being determined at this time. Leaf area index (LAI) increases 
to 2.0 for fully irrigated corn. Daily corn water use averages 
between 0.15 and 0.20 inches per day (Table I). The plant’s 
roots are concentrated in the top 18 inches of soil if there are 
no soil-limiting factors such as compaction, impermeable layer, 
or gravel. Assuming an effective root depth of 18 inches, plant 
available water equals 3 inches in a silt loam soil and 1.5 inches 
in sandy soils. First irrigation depths should account for rainfall 
and be light to limit deep percolation losses.
Between the 8-leaf stage and tassel emergence corn root 
depth, leaf area and water use grow rapidly reaching peak daily 
water use rates during pollination. Root depth increases from 
18 inches to 4 feet during this period doubling the amount of 
soil water available for plant growth. LAI increases to over 
5.0 under fully irrigated corn with plant populations above 
24,000 plants per acre. Water use rates grow to 0.32 inches 
per day when averaged over a three- to five-day period (Table 
I). Individual day water use rates can reach over 0.40 inches 
per day when high air temperature, low humidity and windy 
conditions prevail. Due to the high water use rates, it is im­
portant to avoid water stress during the reproductive stage. 
Severe water stress during silking tends to desiccate the silks 
and pollen grains causing poor pollination. Water stress during 
silking will result in the greatest yield reduction. Irrigation 
depths should be increased to match corn ETc minus rainfall 
while leaving some room in the soil for future potential rainfall 
events (0.5 inches for a silt loam soil).
Water requirements remain high during the early repro­
ductive stages, often remaining in the 0.30 to 0.35 inches per 
day range until the dough stage (Table I). During this time, 
kernels are growing as the plant transfers dry matter to the 
grain. Root development begins to slow down during the 
blister kernel stage and remains nearly constant at 4.5 to 5 
feet for the remainder of the season and plant available soil 
water reaches a maximum value. Bottom leaves begin dying 
back during this period of time but have little impact of crop 
water use rates or yield. Irrigation depths should match corn 
water use minus rainfall while continuing to leave room for 
future rainfall events.
Corn water use rates decline beginning with the dough 
stage in response to lower atmospheric demand (shorter days 
and cooler temperatures and lower solar radiation), loss of trans­
piring leaf area, and changes in plant physiology as the grain 
approaches maturity. Corn water use drops from 0.30 inches 
per day to 0.20 inches per day by full dent (Table I). Lower 
leaf loss continues during this period as well. It is assumed­ that 
the crop root zone remains constant at approximately­ 4.5 feet 
under fully irrigated conditions. Due to reduced crop water 
requirements, soil water levels can be drawn down below 50 
percent depleted toward the end of the dent stage without 
affecting­ grain yield. However, corn does require some water 
right up to physiological maturity so one should continue to 
monitor corn water use rates and soil water levels. 
As corn approaches physiological maturity more water can 
be removed from the soil profile without impacting final grain 
yields. Determining when to stop irrigating is an important 
economic decision. Saving one pass with a center pivot or one 
irrigation event with a furrow irrigation system reduces produc­
tion costs associated with pumping the irrigation water.
Irrigation Management
Irrigation management is basically deciding when to 
irrigate and how much to apply. The decision must be based 
on the available irrigation water supply, the soil water hold­
ing capacity and water intake rate, and the corn water needs. 
Well-timed irrigations provide enough water to prevent corn 
stress while fully using water from rainfall and available in 
the soil. Thus, irrigation scheduling accounts for all plant 
sources of water to produce economic yields. 
EC783 Watermark Granular Matrix Sensor to Measure 
Soil Matric Potential for Irrigation Management provides a 
detailed discussion about granular matrix soil water sensor 
field preparation and installation procedures. In addition, the 
publication provides information on how to convert readings 
recorded in the field into how much plant available water has 
been removed from the soil or soil water depletion. Tabular 
values are provided for eight general soil texture classifica­
tions. Finally, an example is provided to show how the soil 
water readings can be used to determine the time for the next 
irrigation event.
Irrigation management based upon potential crop water 
use estimates obtained from ETgages is discussed in detail 
in NebGuide G1579 Using Modified Atmometers (ETgage) 
for Irrigation Management. Estimated potential crop water 
use rates based on weather conditions can be obtained from 
the High Plains Regional Climate Center. Estimated ETc can 
be obtained using a subscription program directly from the 
Climate Center via the Internet. In this way, crop water use 
can be estimated for specific fields using the field location, 
emergence date and relative maturity. Similar information 
is available from radio stations and some newspapers based 
upon an average emergence date and crop relative maturity 
planted in the area.
Irrigation management also includes considering the 
economic and environmental consequences of each irriga­
tion event. For example, suppose a crop production function 
indicates that the last 2 inches of irrigation water applied under­

--- PAGE 4 ---
Extension is a Division of the Institute of Agriculture and Natural Resources at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln 
cooperating with the Counties and the United States Department of Agriculture.
University of Nebraska–Lincoln Extension educational programs abide with the nondiscrimination policies
of the University of Nebraska–Lincoln and the United States Department of Agriculture.
© 2008, The Board of Regents of the University of Nebraska on behalf of the University of Nebraska–Lincoln Extension.  All rights reserved.
full irrigated conditions produces 2.5 bushels of corn per 
inch. If the price for corn is $3.15 per bushel, the increase in 
income resulting from the water application is $7.88 per acre 
(2.5 bu/ac x $3.15 / bu). If pumping cost (fixed and owner­
ship) is less than $7.88 per acre, net income will increase as a 
result of applying the water. However, irrigation management 
must also evaluate the environmental aspects of irrigating. 
For example, if the plant uses 0.2 inch of the applied water, 
what are the potential environmental effects of the remaining 
0.8 inches of water? If the extra water makes its way to the 
aquifer and carries 8 lbs of nitrogen with it, will the increase 
in net income be worth it?
Soil Textures
Soils classified as coarse-textured include: fine sands, 
loamy sands and fine sandy loams. These soils generally have 
plant available water holding capacities less than 1.5 inches 
per foot. In the top 3 feet, the plant available soil water at 
field capacity can be between 1.5 and 2.7 inches. Some sandy 
soils in Nebraska also have root-restricting layers at shallow 
depths that can restrict root development. The combination 
of low plant available water capacity and shallow rooting 
depth results in a relatively small soil-water reservoir. Small 
soil-water reservoirs create challenging water management 
scenarios. Application depths greater than 0.75 inches could 
result in plant stress in the event of an unexpected system failure. 
Frequent irrigations of less than 0.50 inches reduce the water 
application efficiency due to the amount of water lost during 
each application event. A compromise is to apply relatively 
frequent light (0.50 to 0.75 in.) water applications. 
Medium- and fine-textured soils generally have plant avail­
able water capacities of more than 1.8 inches per foot. In the 
top 3 feet, the plant available soil water at field capacity can 
be between 5.4 and 7.6 inches. Because these soil textures can 
store more water, irrigators have more scheduling flexibility.
If no leaching or surface runoff occurs, water applications of 
0.75 to 1.3 inches are appropriate for these soils. 
Irrigation Systems
In Nebraska, approximately 70 percent of the irrigation 
water is supplied by center pivot sprinkler systems and about 
30 percent using furrow irrigation. An estimate of the water ap­
plication efficiency is needed to determine the amount of water 
that might need to be pumped per season. Conventional gated 
pipe irrigation with no reuse pit typically has an efficiency of 
about 50 percent. This means if 10 inches of net irrigation is 
required, an irrigator using conventional gated pipe and no reuse 
would have to pump 20 inches of water. With a reuse system the 
maximum efficiency increases to near 70 percent, and the depth 
pumped would decrease to 14 inches. When furrow irrigating, 
it is important to irrigate the entire field quickly. Every-other-
furrow irrigation supplies water to more area in a given amount 
of time and produces yield comparable to those achieved when 
every-furrow is irrigated. In addition to saving time, the water 
application depth may be reduced 20 percent to 30 percent by 
implementing every-other-furrow irrigation. With no reuse sys­
tem, every-other-furrow irrigation is about 60 percent efficient. 
With a reuse system, maximum efficiency increases to near 75 
percent. Surface irrigation management is discussed in detail in 
NebGuide G1338 Managing Furrow Irrigation Systems. 
Properly designed and well-maintained center pivot and 
lateral move sprinkler irrigation systems can be 85 percent 
to 90 percent efficient. A sprinkler irrigation system that is 
90 percent efficient would require a gross application of 
11 inches to deliver a net application of 10 inches. If farm­
ing practices are changed to accommodate increased water 
application­ rates, and sprinkler spacing is less than 7.5 feet, 
system efficiencies can be improved by dropping the sprinkler 
nozzles nearer the soil surface. Center pivots also allow more 
precise application depths and timing than are possible with 
furrow irrigation systems. The ability to consistently apply 
only the depth of water needed allow center pivots to take 
full advantage of rainfall and minimize the potential for plant 
stress. For more information about center pivot system design 
and management see the University of Nebraska–Lincoln 
Extension publication Web site.
Summary
Proper water management on irrigated corn can produce 
economic yields, conserve water supplies and preserve or 
enhance water quality. Use corn ETc estimates and regular 
soil water measurements to determine irrigation timing and 
amount. Consider the irrigation water supply and the system’s 
ability to deliver the water. Work to maximize the efficiency of 
your irrigation system by performing regular maintenance. A 
critical concept of any crop production parameter is: to man­
age it, you must measure it. In order to manage an irrigation 
system effectively, irrigators need to know how much water 
has been pumped and where it has gone. Efficient irrigation 
management requires that accurate records be kept document­
ing the water applied and rainfall for each field.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to recognize the work of the 
extension specialist who wrote the original edition of this 
NebGuide: Brian Benham, former water resources engineer, 
South Central Research and Extension Center. 
References
Eisenhauer, D.E., D.L. Martin, G.J. Hoffman. 1997. Irrigation Systems 
Management MSM452/852: Class Notes. University of Nebraska, 
Lincoln, Neb. 
Hoffman, G. J., R.G. Evans, M.E. Jensen, D.L. Martin, and R.L. Elliot, Edi­
tors. 2007. Design and Operation of Farm Irrigation Systems. ASAE, 
St. Joseph, Mo. 
Ritchie, S.W., J.J. Hanway, and G.O. Benson. 1986. How a Corn Plant 
Develops. Special Report No. 48. Iowa State University Cooperative 
Extension, Ames, Iowa.
Nebraska Department of Natural Resources. 2007. Annual Evaluation of 
Availability of Hydrologically Connected Water Supplies (Figure 
M-1). http://www.dnr.state.ne.us/LB962/AnnualReport_2007/Annu­
alReport2007.pdf.
This publication has been peer reviewed.
UNL Extension publications are available online 
at http://extension.unl.edu/publications.
Index: Field Crops
Corn
Issued May 2008