--- PAGE 1 ---
Chapter 2 
Soils 
Part 652 
 
 
Irrigation Guide 
NEBRASKA AMENDMENT 
 
 
 
(c) Soil and Irrigation Parameters 
It has been said that you don't irrigate a crop, 
you irrigate the soil.  In order to understand 
the principles of irrigation, it is imperative that 
a person who works with irrigation keep the 
following in mind: 
1.  Water is first introduced to the soil surface 
and then to the soil profile either by 
snowmelt, rainfall or irrigation. 
2.  The crop then removes the water from the 
soil. 
When water is to be introduced to the soil, 
there are two things that an irrigator is 
interested in: 
1.  How fast can the soil take the water? 
2.  How much water can the soil profile hold? 
Intake rates (inches/hr) are used to describe 
or measure how fast the soil can take water.  
Intake rates are described in three ways: 
*1. Initial Intake Rate is the rate the soil will 
take water when it is dry and water first 
contacts the surface. 
*2. Basic Intake Rate is the rate the soil will 
take water after it is saturated. 
*3. Average Intake Rate is the average rate of 
intake of a soil from a dry to a saturated 
condition. 
*In these cases, this is without runoff. 
Curves have been developed which show the 
intake rate of different soils plotted against 
time.  The soils have been grouped together 
in "Intake Families." 
An Intake Family of soils has the same 
average intake rate.  Figure 2-3 (pg 2-18) & 
Figure 2-4 (pg. 2-19) is a plotting of the 
Family Intake Curves the NRCS uses. 
To understand how much water can or will be 
introduced to a soil profile, the irrigator and 
technician need to become familiar with the 
following terms. 
Wilting Point - The amount of moisture a soil 
profile will have when the plant is unable to 
obtain sufficient moisture to continue active 
growth. 
Permanent Wilting Point - The amount of 
moisture a soil profile will have when the 
plant is unable to obtain any more moisture 
from the soil. 
Saturation Point - The maximum amount of 
moisture a soil profile can hold. 
Available Water Capacity (AWC) - How much 
water is available to the plant, the difference 
between the Field Capacity and the 
Permanent Wilting Point. 
Figure 2-1 (pg 2-9) shows a graphical 
example of these parameters for different soil 
textures. 
When we talk about the amount of moisture 
in the soil profile, it becomes evident that we 
are considering one specific depth. 
The crop that is being grown and the stage of 
development it is in will dictate what depth of 
profile should be considered.  See Nebraska 
supplements to Chapter 3 for root depths by 
crop and growth stage.  Normal irrigation 
depths can be found in Nebraska 
supplements to Chapter 6, by crop, irrigation 
group, and slope group.  It was stated earlier 
that the Available Water Capacity (AWC) is 
how much water is available to the plant.  
Although this water is available to the plant, in 
most cases the roots can't extract the 
moisture fast enough to keep the plant from 
stressing as it approaches the Permanent 
Wilting Point, see Figure 2-1 (pg 2-9). 
If it is the irrigator’s intention to irrigate before 
the plant is stressed, irrigation should begin 
before the Wilting Point.  In this Irrigation 
Guide, we have said this will be when half of 
the water is used between the Field Capacity 
and the Permanent Wilting Point or half of the 
Available Water Capacity (AWC).  This 
amount of moisture is called Management 
Allowable Depletion (MAD). 
 
(210-VI-NEH-IG, Amend 4, April 2005) 
NE2-35

--- PAGE 2 ---
Chapter 2 
Soils 
Part 652 
 
 
Irrigation Guide 
NEBRASKA AMENDMENT 
 
 
 
One half of the AWC was selected as an 
average for all soils.  In reality, it will vary with 
different soils, crops, and climate.  See 
“Consumptive Use of Selected Nebraska 
Crops” table in Nebraska Supplements to 
Chapter 4. 
(d) Use of Irrigation Design Groups 
The soils listed in this Irrigation Guide include 
the irrigable soils presently being mapped in 
Nebraska.  Land types and soils genera1ly 
considered non-irrigable are not included.  As 
additional soils are recognized, they are to be 
added to the appropriate irrigation design 
group.  Some soil phases or variants suitable 
for irrigation are not included in the listing of 
soils.  The design group will be assigned 
locally in counties where they occur. 
The soils in each series were evaluated and 
placed into one of 14 groups called Irrigation 
Design Groups.  Soils having approximately 
equal intake rates, available water capacities, 
and available root zone depths were placed 
together.  Some groups include soils with 
minor variations in intake rate, available water 
capacity and permeability.  If the variation is 
significant, it is noted in the irrigation design 
group where the soil is listed. 
The grouping of soils is shown in the two 
listings that follow.  The first list shows all the 
soils in alphabetical order by series, surface 
texture with the appropriate irrigation design 
group. 
The second listing is by irrigation design 
groups and gives the principal soils included 
in each of the 14 groups.  Two of these are 
divided into sub- groups because of minor 
profile differences and avai1able water 
capacity.  This is not enough difference to 
justify dividing the soils into additional design 
groups.  The intake family used in preparing 
the design data is included. 
Included is a general description of the 
texture profiles.  Where soils of a design 
group are subdivided, there is a general 
description for each subgroup. 
The estimated available water capacity for 
each soil group or subgroup follows the 
description.  The amounts of moisture are 
cumulative by one-foot or one-half foot 
increments of depth.  The data used to 
calculate the available water capacities are in 
Table 2-16 that follows this grouping of soils.  
This table shows available water capacities 
by soil texture classes.  It also gives the 
range of availab1e water capacity for each of 
the soil texture classes for the surface layer, 
subsoil, and lower horizon.  With this table it 
is possible to make a reasonable estimate of 
the available water capacity of any soil profile 
for which the horizon thickness and texture is 
mown. 
The most common soils and their respective 
field symbol are listed below the available 
water capacities for each design group or 
subgroup. 
A form for listing each soil and the irrigation 
design group number in a county or survey 
area is included last in this section.  Listing 
the mapping unit or soils in a county on one 
or several pages of this form simplifies the 
use of this guide for each area.  The 
statewide list that follows this section will be 
of value in preparing the county list. 
Available Water Capacity of Soils by Soil 
Texture Classes 
In estimating available water capacity of the 
groups of soils in this irrigation guide, the 
predominant soil textures of the major soil 
horizons for soils in each irrigation group 
were used. Individual soils in the irrigation 
design groups vary somewhat in total 
available water capacity because of minor 
differences in texture of the soil horizons. 
 
NE2-36 
(210-VI-NEH-IG, Amend 4, April 2005)