--- PAGE 1 ---
Soil Quality Indicators
Available Water Capacity
Available water capacity is the maximum amount of plant
available water a soil can provide. It is an indicator of a
soil’s ability to retain water and make it sufficiently
available for plant use.
Available water capacityis the water held in soil between
its field capacity and permanent wilting point. Field
capacity is the water remaining in a soil after it has been
thoroughly saturated and allowed to drain freely, usually
for one to two days. Permanent wilting point is the
moisture content of a soil at which plants wilt and fail to
recover when supplied with sufficient moisture. Water
capacity is usually expressed as a volume fraction or
percentage, or as a depth (in or cm).
Factors Affecting
Inherent - Available water capacity is affected by soil
texture, presence and abundance of rock fragments, and
soil depth and layers.
Available water capacity increases with increasingly fine
textured soil, from sands to loams and silt loams. Coarse
textured soils have lower field capacity since they are high
in large pores subject to free drainage. Fine textured soils
have a greater occurrence of small pores that hold water
against free drainage, resulting in a comparatively higher
field capacity. However, in comparison to well-aggregated
loam and silt loam soils, the available water capacity of
predominantly clay soils tends to be lower since these soils
have an increased permanent wilting point (see Figure 1).
Rock fragments reduce available water capacity of soil
proportionate to their volume, unless the rocks are porous.
Soil depth and root restricting layers affect total available
water capacity since they can limit the volume of soil
available for root growth. (Restrictive layers may be
naturally occurring or a result of management activities.)
Plant rooting characteristics must be considered for a
practical understanding of the effects of soil depth and
restrictive layers on water available for plant growth. A
restrictive layer at 20 inches might have little consequence
on the water requirements of a shallow-rooted crop.
However, this layer might severely limit the volume of soil
a deep-rooted crop can explore for moisture.
Dynamic - Available water capacity is affected by
organic matter, compaction, and salt concentration of the
soil.
Organic matter increases a soil’s ability to hold water, both
directly and indirectly. When a soil is at field capacity,
organic matter has a higher water holding capacity than a
similar volume of mineral soil. While the water held by
organic matter at the permanent wilting point is also
higher, overall, an increase in organic matter increases a
soil’s ability to store water available for plant use.
Indirectly, organic matter improves soil structure and
aggregate stability, resulting in increased pore size and
volume. These soil quality improvements result in
increased infiltration, movement of water through the soil,
and available water capacity (see Figure 2).
Compaction reduces available water capacity through its
adverse affects on both field capacity and permanent
wilting point. Compaction reduces total pore volume,
consequently reducing water storage when the soil is at
field capacity. Compaction also crushes large soil pores
into much smaller micropores. Since micropores hold
water more tightly than larger pores, more water is held in
soil at its permanent wilting point.
Salts in soil water result from fertilizer application or
naturally occurring compounds. Salt concentration
increases as soil water decreases. For soils high in soluble
salts, moisture stress results when plants cannot uptake
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
0
1
2
3
4
Inches of water / ft. soil depth
Sandy
loam
Loam
Silt
loam
Sand Loamy
sand
Fine
sandy
loam
Silty
clay
loam
Clay
loam
Silty
clay
Clay
Field Capacity
Permanent Wilting Point
Available Water
Fineness of texture 
Unavailable Water
Figure 1. General relationship between soil moisture and texture.
Ohio Agronomy Guide, 14th edition, Bulletin 472-05
Indicator
P
Test
L/O
Function
D
Helping People Help the Land...

--- PAGE 2 ---
water across an unfavorable salt concentration gradient.
Soils with high salt concentration tend to have reduced
available water capacity because more water is retained at
the permanent wilting point than if water was held by
physical factors alone. These effects are most pronounced
in soils in dry regions where salts accumulate because of
irrigation or natural processes.
Relationship to Soil Function
Soil is a major storage reservoir for water. In areas where
rain falls daily and supplies the soil with as much or more
water than is removed by plants, available water capacity
may be of little importance. However, in areas where
plants remove more water than is supplied by precipitation,
the amount of water held by the soil may be critical. Water
held in the soil may be necessary to sustain plants between
rainfall or irrigation events. By holding water for future
use, soil buffers the plant – root environment against
periods of water deficit.
Available water capacity is used to develop water budgets,
predict droughtiness, design and operate irrigation systems,
design drainage systems, protect water resources, and
predict yields.
Problems with Poor Function
Lack of available water reduces root and plant growth, and
it can lead to plant death if sufficient moisture is not
provided before a plant permanently wilts. A soil’s ability
to function for water storage also influences runoff and
nutrient leaching.
Agricultural land management practices that lead to poor
available water capacity include those that prevent
accumulation of soil organic matter and/or result in soil
compaction and reduced pore volume and size:
•
Conventional tillage operations,
•
Low residue crop rotations, and burning, burying,
harvesting, or otherwise removing plant residues,
•
Heavy equipment traffic on wet soils, and
•
Grazing systems that allow development of livestock
loafing areas and livestock trails.
As natural areas are permanently converted to homes,
roads, and parking areas, the overall amount of water that
can be stored in the soil is reduced. This leads to higher
total runoff, increased pressure on storm water drainage
systems, a higher likelihood of flooding, and generally
poorer water quality in streams and lakes.
Improving Available Water Capacity
Farmers can grow high residue crops, perennial sod and
cover crops, reduce soil disturbing activities, and manage
residue to protect and increase soil organic matter to make
improvements in a soil’s available water capacity. When
feasible, tillage, harvest, and other farming operations
requiring heavy equipment can be avoided when the soil is
wet to minimize compaction; and compacted layers can be
ripped to break them and expand the depth of the soil
available for root growth.
For soil high in soluble salts, management activities that
maintain salts below the root zone can be used. These
include irrigation to leach salts below the root zone and
practices that promote infiltration, reduce evaporation,
minimize disturbance, manage residue, and prevent mixing
of salt-laden lower soil layers with surface layers.
Conservation practices resulting in available water capacity
favorable to soil function include:
•
Conservation Crop Rotation
•
Cover Crop
•
Prescribed Grazing
•
Residue and Tillage Management
•
Salinity and Sodic Soil Management
Developers can incorporate the use of permeable parking
areas, green roofs, and other practices that minimize the
impact of development on soil water storage.
Measuring Available Water Capacity
Reference: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, 2005. National Soil
Survey Handbook, title 430-VI. Soil Properties and
Qualities (Part 618), Available Water Capacity (618.05).
Online at: http://soils.usda.gov/technical/handbook/
Specialized equipment, shortcuts, tips:
Determination of permanent wilting point moisture content
requires a pressure membrane apparatus.
Time needed: One to two days is required for free
drainage and to allow soil to reach field capacity.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
soil water ft3 / ft3 soil
% soil organic matter by weight
Field Capacity
Available Water
Permanent wilting percentage
Figure 2. Effect of increasing organic matter on available water
capacity of silt loam soils. Adapted from Hudson, SWCS, 1994.
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
June 2008